---
title: "First Impressions: Avengers: Infinity War"
date: "04/26/2018"
topic: "Movies"
tags:
    - movies
    - marvel
    - avengers
---
### **_Warning: This review contains spoilers for Avengers: Infinity War_**

I just got back from seeing _Avengers: Infinity War_, and I want to make sure that I write down my early impressions before delving into what critics, my friends, and the Internet thought. This will naturally contain major spoilers to the plot of the film, and I would heavily encourage anyone that hasn't seen the film to wait to see it before reading, as this film specifically will be much more enjoyable without knowing anything going in. So consider yourselves warned.

Ok, let's start with the basics. This film is the culmination of a _ten year_ journey, and essentially an end to an 18 film series. Almost every hero from all of the past Marvel films makes an appearance, which means that there are double digit star actors and actresses in it. This film was directed by the Russo brothers, who were the directors for _Captain America: The Winter Soldier_ and _Captain America: Civil War_. This is the first Avengers film not directed by Joss Whedon, and is the start of the end of Marvel's Phase Three. This is one of the most expensive experiments in cinema history, and for now, remains one of a kind: the end goal of a cinematic shared universe.

In order to fill some more space on the screen before I get to specific plot points (I want to make sure any story spoilers are beneath the fold), here are some general thoughts about the film. Firstly, this film is very much part one. Anyone that followed the production of the film will expect that. The next Avengers, whose title is at this point unknown, releases one year from now in May 2019. When this film was announced, it originally included _Part One_ in its subtitle, but Marvel quickly erased that and started being coy about whether the highly anticipated Infinity War saga would end in a single film. I believe that two part films are almost always a mistake for a few reasons, the biggest being that the end of part one will not feel like an end, so I will be curious to see the reaction to this in a Marvel film.

Secondly, Thanos, the film's villain, is 100% the main character. He has the most screen time, lines, and character development. The CGI used to render him is very well done, which is absolutely essential given his daunting presence throughout the film. Marvel even cheekily acknowledged Thanos' role by ending the film's credits with "Thanos will return". This line, a staple of Marvel films, is usually reserved for the main heroes of their respective films, so this is the first time a villain has been referenced in this way.

Thirdly, this movie does a very nice job at making sure the tone of all of the various characters fits together nicely. The humor common from the Guardians of the Galaxy is very much present, but doesn't get in the way of Iron Man's sarcastic wit or Peter Parker's naivety, and when all three of them are on the screen at the same time, nothing feels out of place, nor does it get in the way of having its own style. This is very much a success on the film's part I feel, and was vital to get right, something that the recent _Justice League_ didn't in my opinion.

Now to talk about the plot. People die in this film. A lot of people, some of them well known and loved characters. There are two general types of deaths in the film, the physical "real" deaths, and the ones that happen at the end of the film when Thanos uses the combined power of all the Infinity Stones to erase them from existence. It isn't exactly clear which are reversible at this point, though it is a certainty that some of it will be undone as part of the plot of Avengers 4.

In the "real" deaths category is Loki, Heimdall, Gamora, and Vision. With both Loki and Heimdall dead, Thor has virtually lost everything between this film and _Ragnarok_. His father, his mother, his brother and sister, his best friends, his home, and at least half of the remaining Asguardians. And his hammer. One of the best scenes in the movie in my opinion, is when Thor has to explaining to Rocket Raccoon how much he has lost, and how he has nothing to lose. This is perhaps the most character we have seen from Thor, and Chris Hemsworth does an excellent job portraying the sorrow and desperation Thor feels.

Gamora is sacrificed by Thanos to obtain the soul stone, as Thanos must trade the soul of his most loved daughter for it. I am not sure how I feel about this plot point. The soul stone basically comes out of nowhere, with little lead-up. I do like that, compared to the other stones, where Thanos has to fight for them, the soul stone goes to him willingly after he sacrifices Gamora. Also, Josh Brolin does an excellent job at giving Thanos real human emotions, so much so that you at least understand why he is doing what he is doing, if not empathize with him.

Vision is killed at the end of the film as Thanos rips the mind stone out of his head. Actually, Vision is killed twice, once by Wanda Maximoff as she destroys the mind stone before Thanos can get it, and again after Thanos rewinds time using the time stone to fix the mind stone and take it. So brutal.

The film concludes with Thanos snapping his fingers and wiping half of the universe out. This scene is haunting, as it plays without music, and shows Bucky, Black Panther, Spider-man, Falcon, Dr. Strange, Groot, Star-lord, Drax, and Mantis all turn into dust. These are what I consider 'Infinity stone' deaths. The list is brutally long, but notably does not contain the original Avengers, presumably leaving them as the stars of _Avengers 4_. Knowing the story of the _Infinity Gauntlet_ comic line, I was expecting this outcome, so it wasn't a shock to me. Especially given we know that a Spider-man sequel is on the schedule, as well as _Guardians of the Galaxy 3_, it is likely these deaths will be undone at some point, though how is the big question.

This film is dark. Though it has some very funny moments, the ending is incredibly gut wrenching. Seeing young Peter Parker afraid of death and begging not to go is the most heartbreaking scene in all of the MCU. I enjoyed this aspect, as it is a nice change of pace from the more light hearted, colorful Marvel films that came before, but it doesn't feel out of place. I haven't quite processed all of the deaths that occurred, and feel particularly strongly about the loss of Loki, one of my favorite characters of the MCU.

At two and a half hours, this film is on the long side, but with so many characters, most of them show up for minutes at most and have only a few lines of dialog. Captain America is probably most notable in this area, as he is just not given a whole lot to do. His entrance into the film is epic, as he, Falcon, and Black Widow swoop in to save Vision from Thanos' thugs. After that, however, he takes a definite back seat. A select few characters are featured more heavily. Thor in particular is given a lot of attention, and his character development is excellent. He also has a bad-ass entrance in the last battle that put a smile on my face. Iron man, Dr. Strange, and Gamora also play pretty important roles in the film. As a Dr. Strange fan, I am super happy he is so prominent, and he is given an epic 1v1 fight against Thanos where his magical prowess is on full display, something that was noticeably lacking from his solo film.

Overall, I have mixed feelings about the balance of the characters' screen times. Thanos really feels fleshed out, and he definitely needed as much screen time as he got. I do wish we could have seen more Cap, especially him interacting more with Black Panther and Bucky when he goes to Wakanda before the final battle. As _Avengers 4_ is likely to continue the storyline though, and with half our heroes gone, I would expect that we see a lot more of the remaining heroes in the next film.

I mentioned above that this film was an experiment, an attempt to see if a film could be made as a conclusion of sorts to a shared cinematic universe. Everything for ten years has been building up to this point, and I personally have been excited for this film since the first Avengers. So, did it succeed in this experiment? I think so. This film will undoubtedly break box office records, so by that measure, yes. Did it manage to tell a compelling story? To some degree, definitely. Thanos is not just a cartoony villain with evil intent, he has a purpose he thinks is noble and doesn't see himself as the villain, but as the hero. This is pulled off so well that I found myself rooting for Thanos at the end, and as Marvel has historically had a bit of a villain problem (in that they all generally die), having a villain built up since 2012 actually survive, win, and still have a personality is a success. I think there are a lot of valid criticisms to be made about the balance of the huge cast of heroes, but I am not sure much can be done to alleviate it, and with half of them dead, _Avengers 4_ will definitely be a bit smaller in that sense.

One thing that I feel might be a bit of a detriment to this film that _Avengers 4_ won't have is predictability. Even if you aren't familiar with the Infinity Gauntlet comic line, the expected outcome is that Thanos gets all of the Infinity Stones. We have known this for some time, and this is what happens in the film. There just wasn't any other direction they could have taken the film. I don't think this was avoidable. Now that this movie is out of the way, in a sense, _Avengers 4_ has a much wider playing field to work with, and that excites me quite a bit.

This film didn't have any outright bad parts to it. Overall, it feels a bit bloated with characters, both heroes and villains, and not much time is spent on most of them. Thanos steals the show, and there are quite a few scenes that are either amazing character moments or epic action pieces, some of the best out of the entire MCU. The film doesn't quite land that novelty that the first Avengers had, nor does it feel like it quite landed on its feet like the first one did. Its depressing cliffhanger ending doesn't feel satisfying. Despite that, I really enjoyed the film, and thought it did what it set out to accomplish.